---
title: Canada Cannot Become The 51st State
tags: ['politics']
draft: true
starred: false
---

When Trump joked that Canada should become America’s 51st state, Trudeau, Canada’s prime minister, fired back that there isn’t a “snowball’s chance in hell” of that happening. The vast majority of Canadians agreed. Countries don’t generally like it when you question their sovereignty. While Republicans brushed it off as Trump just “trolling” Canada, many can’t help but see it as an imperialist threat to our nationhood. I agree that Canada cannot become the 51st state of America, but not for the reasons you might think.

I’ll be the first to admit that being America’s hat has its drawbacks. Culturally, we’re basically the same as Americans. We speak the same language (except Quebec), watch the same shows on Netflix (except Quebec), and eat the same food (except poutines). We’re basically American, though a bit nicer. But the US is where things actually happen, which is why anyone with a spark of talent flees south faster than you can say “universal healthcare.” Drake. Ryan Reynolds. Jim Carrey. Did you know Walt Disney was of Canadian descent? Even Elon Musk, that pest, is a Canadian citizen. If Canada was a part of America, then all those great Canadians we’ve been losing would still be in the country, since we’d all be the same country.

The economic case for union is surprisingly strong, too. If Canada and America merged, there would be no tariffs between us and freer trade. Canadians could have a real effect on American politics, which affect the world at large. Canadians would no longer need a visa to work in the US, and vice versa, which would strengthen both economies. We would get stronger freedom of speech rights, which would be nice. Maybe the Americans would even let us pop a little maple leaf onto the flag instead of another star. That would be cool. And I, for one, would be happy to never hear another American say they want to move to Canada when an election doesn’t go their way. (Spoiler: they never come. Those too weak to handle losing an election can’t handle -40° winters either.)

But despite all of the possible benefits that most Canadians are eager to overlook, there is one serious reason why I believe we cannot morally accept such a merger: The land in Canada is not ours to give away. The land our cities and homes and Tim Horton’s parking lots are built on is the unceded, unsurrendered territory of the various Indigenous Peoples of Canada. The land does not belong to us, but rather belongs to Canada’s indigenous populations, which have lived here since time immemorial. To become the 51st state of the United States would be to deny the inherent and Treaty rights of the First Nations Peoples of Canada. Unless, of course, Americans began every academic class, every Super Bowl, every school shooting vigil, and every impeachment hearing with a performative statement acknowledging indigenous ownership of the land.

While merging with the US Empire might be tempting, the decision is not up to us. If you want to take our land, you’ll have to take it from its true owners. And trust us, that’s a headache you don’t want.

P.S. If you do figure out how to bring us on as the 51st state, consider leaving Quebec out of it. Trust me.
