---
title: A Cruel and Selfish Society
tags: ['politics']
draft: false
starred: false
---

What kind of society allows scammers to take advantage of the elderly and the intellectually disabled? A cruel and selfish one. My cousin is intellectually disabled. He lost a lot of weight because he could no longer afford groceries. This is because he was being so mercilessly scammed by people online he couldn't eat. What kind of society allows scamming to be de facto legal?

My ex girlfriend went to the police after having been scammed out of $1000+ when buying a pet lizard. She sent the money, and the man never sent the lizard. The police told her to fuck off. Civil issue. I don't know when fraud became a civil issue. They must not have the resources to prosecute cases of fraud. But why? Why do they not have the resources to protect the elderly, the disabled, and normal people who let their guard down?

It has to be because most of us don't care. Rather than have a second well-funded police force dedicated to investigating scams, we would rather have somewhat lower taxes. Fuck the elderly. Fuck the disabled. I want my money.

As soon as you say this to someone, they say, "yeah, but the scammer might be in a different country!" This is how you know for a fact they don't care. It's like when you talk about homelessness and people say, "yeah, but where are we gonna put them?" It's the immediate assumption that a problem is close to impossible to solve without actually making any attempt to solve it. "Yeah, but there might be any problems whatsoever solving this issue, so let's just say it's impossible." The kind of argument a child gives when they don't want to clean something.

There's no possible way to find scammers from other countries and have them prosecuted. Yet as soon as someone posts a picture of a child being sexually abused online, suddenly we have the resources to figure out exactly who they are and cooperate with foreign law enforcement agencies to prosecute. The problem was never really that it wasn't possible. The problem is that we care about children, but we don't care about the elderly or intellectually disabled. This is why I say we are a cruel, selfish society. Because when we care, we find the resources to help. When we don't, we don't. Hence homelessness.