---
title: How I Pronounce Code
draft: false
tags: ['linguistics', 'tech']
---

When I’m writing code, I pronounce certain symbols in my head. Symbols like ’#’ I pronounce “hash”

### More examples

- ! — “bang”
- @ — “at”
- $ — “cash” (good because it rhymes with hash and slash!)
- % — “cent” (or “mod”; contextual)
- ^ — “hat” (rhymes with at)
- & — “and” 
And so on.

I don’t pronounce every symbol. Things like ’**{**’, ’**(**’, ’**,**’, and ’**:**’ don’t get pronounced because they are {{ fn(text=“closer to punctuation than words”, hover=“Though you can debate what makes something punctuation vs. what makes it a word. Is it a word if it carries \“semantic meaning\”? Is it a word if it’s pronounced out loud? Punctuation did originate as a way to aid the reader in reading aloud. In any case I’d say that no character is absolutely used in punctuation or in words. For example, ’**:**’ is usually punctuation, but if you name a math function ’**:**’ or name a piece of software ’**{**’, then those are words, even though they use characters normally used in punctuation. Basically, the distinction is arbitrary so don’t sweat it.”) }} are.

### Metric units get a similar treatment
- ml — “mills” (this one is pretty common)
- mg — “miggs”
- kb — “kibbs”
- kbps — “kipps”
etc.

The question is: why do I care? How much time am I saving by reading “kipps” vs. reading “kay bee pee ess” or “kilobits per second”, or just reading past it without pronouncing it? But whenever I find a neat new way to quickly (internally) pronounce something, I feel like I’ve gained something. In writing this article, I realized I say “see aych root” rather than “{{ fn(text=”change root“, hover=”I could just say “chroot”, as in /tʃɹuːt/, but /tʃɹ/ is a weird way to start a word and it wouldn’t work for chmod.“) }}”, but now I’m going to change that and I feel like I’ve gained something. What, I’m not sure, and I’m sure plenty of people out there think this is silly. I’m sure there are plenty of people who don’t care whether it’s “sue doo” or “sue dough”, as long as it’s typed s–u–d–o.

The more interesting question is, why do I care, but some people don’t? I think the people who don’t care don’t pronounce things as much internally. They rely less on their internal monologue for understanding. There is a theory with a droplet of research behind it that some people have stronger mental visualizations than others, and some people have total {{ fn(text=“aphantasia”, hover=“[The aphantasia subreddit](https://old.reddit.com/r/Aphantasia/comments/g1e6bl/ball_on_a_table_visualization_experiment_2/?ref=share&ref_source=link) has a few tests you can use to find out how aphantasic you are. Here is one, but keep in mind aphantasia is not even a scientifically confirmed condition yet. Visualize/imagine a ball on a table. Now imagine a person walking up to the table and pushing the ball. After you do that, click the reddit link to finish the test.”) }}. The aphantasia phenomenon may be real, or it may be the result of differences in how people communicate about what they visualize, but it’s just one example of many of people differing mentally in large but non-obvious ways. The one I am curious about right now is the extent to which people differ in their utilization of their internal monologue, but there are others. If people do differ in that way, that could explain why I care about how I pronounce symbols, and you don't.